week nine notes

podcast

    this module --> communication
    reproducibility (same method, same results) vs replicability (different method, same result)
    making studies open access opens up the findings to sensationalist responses
    Dr. Ethan Watrall of Michigan State University
        openness is very complicated
        openness is a spectrum, not so binary

Packaging Data Analytical Work Reproducibly Using R (and Friends)
http://faculty.washington.edu/bmarwick/PDFs/Marwick-Boettiger-Mullen-2018-TAS-research-compendia.pdf

    Long considered an axiom of science, the reproducibilityof scientific research has recently come under scrutiny aftersome highly publicized failures to reproduce biomedical studies(Begley and Ellis2012) and psychological experiments (OpenScience Collaboration et al.2015). This has resulted in exten-sive discussion of how to define reproducibility, and how toenhance it across diverse research contexts (Stodden et al.2016;Goodman, Fanelli, and Ioannidis2016;Marwick2017). Here,we use the definition proposed by Claerbout (1992)andtheNational Science Foundation Subcommittee on Replicabilityin Science (Bollen et al.2015): reproducing research is thecalculation of quantitative scientific results by independentresearchers using the original data and methods.
    Without clear instructions, many researchersstruggle to avoid chaos in their file structures, and so are under-standably reluctant to expose their workflow for others to see.This may be one of the reasons that so many requests for detailsabout method, including requests for data and code, are turneddown or go unanswered (Collberg and Proebsting2016).
    Our contribution to this drive to improve the openness andreproducibility of research is to show how R packages can beused as a research compendium for organising and sharingfiles. 
    There are three generic principles that define researchcompendia, independent of particular software tools, and disci-plinary contexts.
        1. A research compendium should organize its filesaccording to the prevailing conventions of the scholarlycommunity, 
        2. A research compendium should maintain a clear separa-tion of data, method, and output, while unambiguouslyexpressing the relationship between those three. 
        3. A research compendium should specify the compu-tational environment that was used for the originalanalysis. 
    A dynamicdocument is a single document that includes both the narra-tive text of a article, and the R code that generates the plots andtables it includes
    ***In the specific case of using an R package as a research com-pendium, you can benefit from the quality control mechanismsrequired to successfully build an R package. By organizing filesintoanRpackage,youfollowconventionsthatsaveyoutimethinking about the best way to organize your project. Writinga function saves us from introducing errors that often resultfrom repeated copying and pasting of code. This is because youcan type one line of code (the name of your function) that callshundreds of lines of code (your function).***
    In many jurisdic-tions, data are considered facts rather than a creative work,so they are not protected by copyright law.
    Once you are ready to share your compendium, the bestway is to archive a specific commit at a repository that issuespersistent URLs, such as a Digital Object Identifier (DOI), forfile archives (e.g., osf.io, figshare.com or zenodo.org). DOIs aredesigned to be far more persistent than other URLs, which oftenbreak as web pages change over time (Klein et al.2014). Thereare many discipline-specific DOI-issuing repositories, listed atre3data.org. You should survey the literature of your researchcommunity to see what repositories are preferred.
    We encourage researchers tostrivetoorganizetheircodeinreproduciblewaysandtreattheircode and data as much a product of their scholarship worthy ofdistribution as the articles themselves.

Chapter Five: The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves
https://mitpressonpubpub.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/6ui5n4vo/release/4

    When approaching new knowledge – any kind of knowledge — it’s essential to ask about the social, cultural, historical and material conditions in which that knowledge was produced, as well as the identities of the humans who made (or are making) that knowledge. Rather than seeing knowledge artifacts – like datasets – as neutral and objective fodder to use for more knowledge making, a feminist perspective advocates for connecting them back to their context, to better understand their limitations and ethical obligations. And, ultimately, to better understand the ways in which power and privilege may be obscuring the truth. 
    There is even a neologism coined by Daniel Kaufmann, an economist with the Revenue Watch Institute, that has been coined to describe this phenomenon: "Zombie data" is data that has been published without any purpose or clear use case in mind.
    So, open data has a context problem. Or, a better way to say this is that governments and data providers have not invested as much time and resources in providing context to end users as they have in providing data.
    Wired magazine editor Chris Anderson would say "No." In 2008, in a now famous Wired article titled "The End of Theory," Anderson made the claim that "with enough data, the numbers speak for themselves." 
    At the point when we have data collected about an entire population, theory is no longer necessary. We also, he says, don't need models and theories to understand why something is happening, just to be able to see that one thing is correlated with another: "Correlation is enough." Anderson's main example is Google search. Google's systems don't need to understand why some pages are more linked to than others, only that it's happening, and they will then use that as an indicator of relevance in search. 
    What has unfolded since 2008 in feminist thinking is also a more sophisticated understanding of the ways in which data-driven systems like Google Search do not just reflect back the racism and sexism embedded throughout society but also participate in reinforcing it. This is the central argument of Algorithms of Oppression, Safiya Noble's study of the harmful stereotypes about Black and Latina women perpetuated by search algorithms. In direct opposition to Anderson, Noble asserts that it is the corporation's responsibility to understand racism in page-linking. Correlation, without context, is not enough when it means that Google recirculates racism.
    Simply stated, there are imbalances of power in the data setting, so we cannot take the numbers in the data set at face value. Here one needs a sophisticated understanding of the context of the data and the actors in the data collection system in order to be able to work with it ethically and truthfully. 
    One of the key analytical missteps of work that "lets the numbers speak for themselves" is the assumption that data are a raw input rather than seeing them as artifacts that have emerged fully cooked into the world, birthed out of a complex set of social and political circumstances already existing in the data setting.
    Unfortunately for Chris Anderson, the answer is that we need more theory, context, and scientific method, not less. Why? Because, quite simply, the humans are always in the loop. Even when the algorithms are doing the heavy lifting. As we showed in What Gets Counted Counts, without theory, survey designers and data analysts are relying on their intuition and "common sense" theories of the things they are measuring and modeling and this leads directly down the path towards cognitive bias.
    Note that in order to train an algorithm to understand the context of subjugated standpoints, significant human infrastructure and ethical navigation is required. Frey and Patton have built long-term, ongoing relationships with individuals and organizations in the community. Indeed, Frye lives and works in the community. Both are trained social workers, with years of experience working in violence prevention. According to Patton, they lead with the social worker's code of ethics, one of whose principles is "Social workers recognize the central importance of human relationships." Rather than using computation to replace human relations, SAFELab is using AI to broker new forms of understanding across power differentials. 
    "But", you may say (and our students say this a lot), "I don't want to tell people what to think. I want to let them interpret the numbers for themselves." This is an ostensibly noble sentiment, but it fails to acknowledge the power relationship between the author and the audience. As the data journalist in this scenario, you are in a position of power to be able to communicate something to your readers. Presumably, you have researched the topic and know more about it than your audience. Because of that, your audience is in a position of listening and paying attention. What this means is that you have a responsibility – precisely because of your position of privilege – to communicate both the data and the most accurate interpretation of the data. If you let the numbers speak for themselves, this is emphatically not more ethical and more democratic. Why? Because, stereotypes and heuristics love a vacuum.
    The feminist imperative to consider context and situate numbers in relation to their social and political context is not just a recommendation but a responsibility of ethical data communication.
    If you are concerned with truth and justice in data, we suggest that you practice recognizing, naming and talking about these structural forces of oppression because it is in aggregated data that they are most evident. 
    Educators, journalists, and civic data publishers are starting to develop more robust tools and methods for context, and we'll take you on a quick tour of several. The first and most important is simply to take an "equity pause" at the beginning of the project, and later at key strategic moments. 
    As applied to data science, an equity pause would involve questioning your research questions, questioning your categories and questioning your expectations, particularly as they relate to data about people. 
    For example, demographer Jill Williams suggests that quantitative work informed by feminist theory may need to treat gender as a dependent variable. Meaning, this work would look at gender as an outcome of other intersecting aspects of identity such as age, race, class, sexuality, and ethnicity. Doing that kind of intersectional analysis might lead you to discover the connection between millennials and expanded social networks that you had previously missed. 
    The bottom line for numbers is that they cannot speak for themselves. In fact, those of us who work with data must actively prevent numbers from speaking for themselves because when those numbers come from a data setting with a power imbalance or misaligned collection incentives (read: pretty much all data settings!), and especially when the numbers have to do with human beings, then they run the risk of being not only discriminatory, not only empirically wrong, but actually dangerous in their reinforcement of an unjust status quo. 

Shared digital experiences supporting collaborative meaning-making at heritage sites
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/Perry.et.al.2019_SharedDigitalExperiences_PrePrint_FINAL.pdf

    Even if it is well known that museums and heritage sites are primarily visited by groups of people rather than individuals, the digital experiences created for them are often inadvertently designed for the individual.
    Visitor studies research confirms that visitors to most sites and museums come in groups (Dierking, 2011; Petrelli et al., 2017; Petrelli & Not, 2005) and that museum visits tend to be driven by a social agenda (Perry, 2012). According to Dierking (2011, p. 202), about 60–70 per cent of museum visitors in the United States (US), United Kingdom and Australia are families, and 25–35 per cent are school or adult tour groups. Only five per cent or less are individuals visiting by themselves. Even among these individuals, vom  Lehn  et  al.  (2001)underlines  that  peripheral  awareness  of  other  strangers  within museums shapes how visitors move through an experience.
    Indeed, visitors themselves may still hold expectations that prompt them to quietly absorb information individually, rather than challenge and engage with it as a group (Chang, 2006; Katifori et al., 2016).
    Trying to preserve group coherence can  be  a  challenge,  as  it  is  common  for  people  to  get  ‘dragged  away’  from  exhibits  or information  that  they  find  interesting  (Tolmie  et  al.,  2014,  p.  1051).  When  constructing  group experiences, a certain degreeof flexibility must be considered.
    If a child is unwilling to participate, their parents will more likely than not compromisein the child’s favour for the coherence of  the  group  at  large  (Rennick-Egglestone  et  al.,  2016).  
    Indeed, it is not uncommon for pairs of people to want to synchronisetheir experience, especially if the purpose of the outing is to spend time together (Fosh et al., 2013).
    The trials found that while much of the conversation between onsite and online visitors was  devoted  to  reporting  where  they  were,  there  were  also  instances  of  reading  text  aloud,  sharing opinions and connecting the space around them to their everyday lives (Galani & Chalmers, 2003). These experiences utilisegaps  in  knowledge  to  encourage  collaboration  between  individuals.  Thus,  the interconnectivity of the physical and digital surroundings can open paths of interaction between museum visitors.
    in the case of parents visiting with children, the experience was mainly led by the latter (who usually carried the device); parents acted mainly as content mediators, sacrificing their own experience for the sake of facilitating their children’s (Rennick-Egglestone et al., 2016). 
    Collaborative games in museums, where there are a mix of characters to manipulate and explore, allow the visitor to step into the narrative via a proxy (Klopfer et al., 2005). It is not difficult to encourage people to interact with each other when asked to play a game, as gaming brings with it the assumption of collaboration and questioning.
    The layout of Çatalhöyük paints a detailed picture of how tightly knit the community must have been.A variety  of  evidence  suggests  little  to  no  social  hierarchy,  implying  an  egalitarian  sociopolitical organisation.  Such  an  egalitarian  structure  offers  a  fascinating  contrast  to  many  current  societies, including those of the main visiting audiences to Çatalhöyük (Turkish nationals followed by Japanese, US  and  Australian  visitors,  among  others),  offering  an  opportunity  for  a  group  experience  to  be developed echoing this Neolithic mindset. 
    Over  15  years  of  observational  and  demographic  data  from visitors  to  Çatalhöyük  show  that  most  fall  into  the  three  categories:  local  parents  with  children, international and local families or a mix of the two, and larger bodies of people like school or tourist groups. 
    Given that the object is related to their visitor profile, as they are prompted to swap, take and leave behind these artefacts in each house, the items slowly become layered with the profiles of different participants every time they change hands (Mirashrafi, 2017). At the end of the onsite experience, visitors are asked to decide among themselves which object to leave behind for good. This means one of the party leaves their experience with nothing at all. The pair, however, takes home a single object that they may keep as asouvenir. However, asking one of the participants to leave behind an object altogether reinforces the theme of fluid ownership in Çatalhöyük.
    However,  users  were  split  regarding  the  role  of  the  mobile experience in connecting them to the environment. Some indicated it limited their interactions, prompting them  to  focus  more  on  the  device  than  they  did  the  room.  Others  identified  multiple  instances  of engagement with the physical environment through their visual and physical examination of the space.
    With  respect  to  experience,  users  developed  feelings  of  attachment  to  the  items  used  in  the activity. These items were commonly referred to as ‘mine’, ‘my’ or sometimes by a given name (i.e. ‘Grandma’). Users also discussed reluctance in parting with the objects, and their connections to what the objects represented. Their comments (see below) indicated a strong personal bond with the items, which was key to their overall experiences. The concept of personal attachment was also discussed in the context of personalisation or ownership of belongings.
    "I feel in touch with the people ... like, you can actually begin to imagine what their life was actually like ... The whole purpose of archaeology is to connect to the past, but now I do feel like I can almost imagine what their day-to-day life was."
    "Giving away one of ours [objects] it was like, Ah! But then it was like, Oh, somebody else might come along and pick that up later so they’ll be fine."
    "I didn’t expect to get such a connection to either [of our] objects and feel that possessiveness. Nor did I feel the want to leave her [the object] behind afterwards because I didn’t want her to be taken away from the site ... And I didn’t expect the experience to make me feel that way, but it does ... which is surprising."
    Comparably, a Turkish participant, reflecting on his original object, described that ‘The bear stamp made me feel powerful.’ He later noted, ‘I was really committed to the bear stamp’ because he drew something on it and it became his own, leaving him regretful to say goodbye.
    Second, the experience relied on a relatively simple set of strategies to facilitate group-based meaning-making, which are arguably replicable in other contexts. These include (1) the pre-visit quiz, which profiles visitors,linking their present day personality to one of the past; (2) the visitor-selected object,  which  is  connected  to  users’  personalities  and  is  personalised  by  them  via  physical modification/decoration; (3) embodied group exploration of a concept (in this case, egalitarianism) while onsite, where the purpose is not to force factual information on participants, nor to demand that they explicitly  imagine  themselves  as  inhabitants  of  Neolithic  Çatalhöyük,  but  rather  to  collaboratively perform actions in the present in ways that may seem unfamiliar to them. 
    As one participant described, ‘I connected with a human being on another level, that I’d never met before and I also appreciated people a lot differently.’ Such collaborative digital experiences can encourage participants not merely to identify with the past, but to rethink their place in the present and future, imagining the world and its inhabitants in a more complex and malleable fashion. 
